---
title: Abstract
order: 1
container: header
---
Protein structure, measured by relative solvent accessibility, serves as a general constraint on the evolution of viral proteins. It was recently shown that distance from functional surfaces may explain an additional portion of the evolution of the viral receptor-binding proteins. However, the general applicability of distance constraints to explain viral protein adaptation remains an open question. Furthermore, it is not known whether or not RSA and distance act uniformly for all of the proteins in a single virus, nor is it known if these constraints are important for rapidly mutating viruses. Therefore, we have carried out an analysis of structural predictors of site-wise $$ dN/dS $$ in HIV-1. Our results indicate that structural constraints do not act uniformly in HIV-1 and that each contraint (RSA and distance) show mixed results for individual proteins. Of the two broad categories of HIV proteins we surveyed, neither showed a common pattern of adaptive evolution or modeling accuracy. Structural constraints were highly predictive in just one of the three enzymes and one of three structural proteins in HIV-1. For the two predictable proteins, the protease enzyme and the *gp120* structural protein, structure could explain between 30% and 40% of the variation in $$ dN/dS $$. We also found that glycosylations in the *gp120* protein of the receptor-binding complex could explain just 2% of the variation in $$ dN/dS $$ and could not explain *gp120* evolution independently of either RSA or distance from the apical surface. Finally, we found with a very conservative cross-validation scheme that adding distance from an optimized reference point significantly improves evolutionary predictions in the majority of HIV proteins. 