---
title: "Discussion"
order: 5
---

We have surveyed structural predictors of $$ dN/dS $$ in HIV-1. We found that the common structural predictors used in other viruses show mixed results for HIV. We found that neither the structural proteins nor the enzymes show a common pattern of either adaptive evolution or modeling accuracy. Evolution could only be modeled in one of the structural proteins (gp120) and one of the enzymes (protease). However, the models generated for those two proteins could explain between 30% and 40% of $$ dN/dS $$. We found that glycosylations in the *gp120* protein could not predict evolution better than simply RSA or distance from the apical surface. Finally, we showed with a very conservative cross-validation scheme that adding distance from an optimized reference point significantly improves evolutionary predictions in the majority of HIV proteins. 

As a result of the error prone polymerase reverse transcriptase, HIV is among the most rapidly mutating and evolving viruses in nature. This fact alone sheds doubt on whether or not structural constraints could be used to predict any portion of adaptation in HIV. It could have been the case that the rapid accumulation of unfixed mutations lead to difficulty in sampling fixed differences or that folding and functional constraints were washed out by an enormous number of sites under positive selection. Neither of these possibilities was systematically true. The distribution of sitewise $$ dN/dS $$ was always continuous ([Figure 1](#figure-1)) and structural constraints predicted some portion of evolution in almost all cases. This finding contradicts the long standing hypothesis in molecular evolution contending that sites in proteins evolve under a limited number of discrete regimes. Typically, one regime is that of $$ dN/dS > 1 $$ where the number of amino acid substitutions is greater than the expectation under neutral DNA changes. A second regime is $$ dN/dS = 1 $$ where the rate of amino acid substitutions exactly equals the null expectation of neutral DNA substitutions. A third regime is $$ dN/dS < 1 $$ where the number of amino acid substitutions is less than the null expectation for a neutral DNA substitution. Historically selection analyses have focused on the sitewise $$ dN/dS $$ relative to the neutral expectation of 1 and calculated the probability that a point value is actually different from the null. However, as our distribution plots show, even in viruses with enormous mutation rates and a large number of confounding polymorphisms that inflate sitewise estimates, the vast majority of sites have $$ dN/dS < 1 $$. More likely, due to a long history of selection for protein folding (and by proxy conserved functional folds) the traditional "neutral" expectation is far from a reasonable generic null model of protein adaptation. Therefore, there really is no neutral regime per se, and structured proteins likely do not ever evolve "neutrally" with any regularity. This is supported by the fact that the distribution of sitewise $$ dN/dS $$ values is always smooth and continuous, and we recently found similar sitewise distributions in influenza protein. In general, there is probably a different neutral expectation for each protein fold and the only meaningful statistical test would be the extent to which a site is an outlier for that fold's sitewise distribution. Moreover, a null model of $$ dN/dS = 1 $$ seems to be constructed on the misunderstanding that a string of letters is a reasonable approximation of proteins; our data suggest it is not.

HIV-1 proteins generally evolve according to known structural constraints. In particular, combined models of the rate of adaptation in *gp120* and protease were quite successful. Interestingly, the extent to which each of the structural constraints predicted evolution in *gp120* and protease varied widely. Each of the two predictors, RSA and distance, accounted for approximately the same proportion of $$ dN/dS $$ in *gp120* whereas RSA was largely useless as a predictor for protease. Therefore, it appears the only critical evolutionary constraint for the protease protein is the relative biophysical coupling of a site to the enzymatic active site.

Of the six proteins we tested, *gp120* was the most easily predicted by both RSA and the combined model. This finding is not particularly surprising since viral binding proteins are reliably under significant pressure from the host immune system and perform among the most critical functions for viral survival. We found a similarly predictive model of evolution for influenza hemagglutinin which performs largely the same function as gp120. Moreover, the directionality of the adaptive pressure was oriented in exactly the same direction in *gp120* as in influenza hemagglutinin; the apical surface of both proteins is under intense adaptive pressure. Surprisingly, RSA and distance predicted a significantly larger portion of the evolution in *gp120* than in influenza hemagglutinin. In addition, the small amount of $$ dN/dS $$ that could be accounted for by the category of glycosylation sites, was completely obliterated by controlling for either RSA or distance, or both. Therefore, contrary to the glycan shield hypothesis ([Wei et al. 2002](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature01470)), it appears glycosylation status is not significant systematic driver of sitewise adaptation in HIV. This result is in line with what has been shown previously from sequence analysis ([Frost et al. 2005](https://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0504658102)).

Due to the success of structural constraints in predicting protein evolution, we did not anticipate that the integrase protein would have no significant structural predictor of evolution. Similarly surprising was that this fact remained true no matter which domains we included and no matter how complete we made the structural model. This is the first protein, not to mention the first viral protein, that has been found to have no apparent structural constraints for its evolution. There are a number of possible explanations. First, considering the historical difficulty of crystallizing the HIV-1 integrase, it may be that the protein spends most of its time in a relatively disordered state. Such a situation would necessarily reduce the pressure to be folded and reduce the RSA constraint. Second, since there are no full length structures generated in a single experiment, it is possible that the all of the partial structures that are available to us missed a significant portion of correct protein contacts. Third, it is also possible that the crystal structures are simply not capturing any real physiological state. Fourth, some combination of these issues might be at play. For example, if the protein is frequently disordered, it may be relatively easy for the protein to be contorted into non-physiological states during crystallization.