---
title: "Introduction"
order: 2
---

<!---Equations and formula can be included either inline ($$ 2+2=4 $$) or as display blocks:-->

<!---<div>\[ \sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\pi_i=\sum_{i=0}^{\infty}\rho^i\pi_0=\frac{\pi_0}{1-\rho}=1 \]</div>-->

Despite the development of dozens of antiretrovirals, decades of vaccine development, and billions spent to halt its transmission, HIV-1 remains a major public health issue. A major challenge in combating the HIV epidemic lies in the viruses ability to adapt to even the most complex, combined therapeutic schedules. Such a high level of adaptability stems from the fact that HIV is among the most rapidly mutating human viruses, it maintains a large intra-patient population size, and it hase a high replication rate ([Mansky and Temin 1995](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7541846), [Frost et al. 2005](https://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0504658102), [Wei et al. 1995](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/373117a0), [Perelson et al. 1996 ](https://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.271.5255.1582), [Perelson et al. 197](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/387188a0), [Chun et al. 1997](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/387183a0)). Further complicating the development of new vaccines and therapeutics, the specific important selection pressures in HIV, the strength of those pressures, and the proteins that are adapting most rapidly is still not well understood.

There is evidence in at least one HIV-1 gene (*env*), that evolution occurs through a number of possible mechanisms that might suggest various patterns of evolution of the receptor-binding protein; one such hypothesis is the glycan shield whereby the virus shift glycosylation patterns to block antibody binding directly ([Wei et al. 2002](https://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature01470)). Such a constraint could produce a pattern of site-wise $$ dN/dS $$ estimates that are highly predictable with just a single category of likely glycosylation sites. Although, there is some evidence that the glycan shield hypothesis does not play out in sequence evolution ([Frost et al. 2005](https://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0504658102)), beyond the *env* gene, relatively little is known about the pattern of site-wise positive and negative selection in HIV proteins. It may be the case that HIV proteins generally evolve by similar constraints (e.g. protein fold preservation) to eukaryotic proteins. Likewise, it might be that folding constraints like the relative solvent accessibility (RSA) of amino acid sites, the linear packing density, or the distance from a functional surface do not at all constrain the evolution of such a rapidly mutating virus. Further, if these constraints are important for HIV evolution, it might be that they act uniformly in all HIV proteins. Or conversely, it may be that the human immune systems applies such asymmetric evolutionary pressures that none of the traditional constraints work for such a rapidly adapting virus.

**Talk a little bit about the distribution of sitewise dN/dS**

In this study, we examine the structural predictors of $$ dN/dS $$ in HIV-1. We find that, similar to influenza, RSA and distance to an optimized reference point are generally significant predictors of virus evolution. Additionally, we find that five out of the six models we produce are significant, but only two can be considered particular strong; those two models account for between 30% and 40% of $$ dN/dS $$. In addition, we find that HIV integrase is the first protein out of many hundred tested by several independent studies that does not have a single statistically significant structural predictor of site-wise evolution. For gp120, we also examine the ability of glycosylations to explain $$ dN/dS $$. The sites within four angstroms of glycosylations can partially predict the evolution of gp120. However, after controlling for either of the structural constraints we use in combined models, glycosylations lose all statistically power. Thus, we find that glycosylations in the *gp120* protein can not predict evolution better than simply RSA or distance from the apical surface. Finally, we find, with a very conservative cross-validation scheme, that adding distance from an optimized reference point significantly improves evolutionary predictions in the majority of HIV proteins. 